Petitboot Bootloader Environment
--------------------------------

DRAFT 2

Authors
-------
Stewart Smith <stewart@linux.vnet.ibm.com>
Samuel Mendoza-Jonas <sjonas@au1.ibm.com>
Jeremy Kerr <jeremy.kerr@au1.ibm.com>

Defitinions
-----------
Petitboot kernel: the Linux kernel in PNOR
skiroot: the userspace environment in which petitboot itself sits
Petitboot: the petitboot bootloader itself (stored in skiroot)

The combination of Petitboot kernel and skiroot sits in the BOOTKERNEL pnor
partition and is loaded by skiboot (which sits in the PAYLOAD partition)

Reference Implemetation
-----------------------

By definition, any tagged op-build release of op-build v1.7 or above is
compliant.

The op-build tree is the reference implementation.

Open Source and building
------------------------

Any customised op-build environment MUST be able to be built on the same
platforms and configurations that upstream op-build version can.

TODO: list these for op-build 1.7

With physical access to a box, you MUST be able to flash a custom built firmware

Petitboot Kernel
----------------
By definition, the default kernel configuration and source tree in op-build
is compliant.

Any changes to kernel code MUST be submitted upstream and a commitment MUST
be made to get them accepted

EXT2 (can use ext3 or ext4 driver)
EXT3 (can use ext4 driver)
EXT4
XFS
BTRFS
ISO9660
UF
VFAT and variants as supported by upstream linux vfat driver.

Sufficient support to have the nvram utility work.

Additional out of tree drivers are acceptable but MUST be submitted upstream
and a committment to get them merged.

A compliant implementation MUST NOT break kexec.

MUST contain drivers for built in disk adapters and network adapters and MUST
support booting from them.

MUST have equivalent LVM/RAID support to the equivalent op-build release.

The petitboot kernel SHOULD include support for a standard set of
user-pluggable peripherals and add-on cards, which will be defined by
the hardware facilities for attaching those devices.

If a user-accessible USB port is present, the petitboot kernel SHOULD
include support for:
  - USB hub devices
  - USB HID keyboard and mouse devices
  - USB mass-storage devices
  - SCSI disk and CDROM protocols
  - (others?)

If a user-accessible PCI / PCI express port is present and available,
the petitboot kernel SHOULD include support for:
 - AHCI-compliant storage devices

Petitboot
---------

If replacing Petitboot itself, you MUST get a written exception to be compliant.

Any modifications to Petitboot MUST maintain the following functionality:
- parsing GRUB, yaboot, pxeboot and petitboot configurations
- support booting both BE and LE linux kernels
- using compliant petitboot-plugins
- using kexec to boot kernels
- booting uncompressed vmlinux
- booting vmlinux with separate initramfs
- passing kernel parameters
- selecting one of many boot options
- persistent boot options stored in NVRAM.
- a method to change boot order/preference temporarily/permanently out of band.
  - for example, via IPMI to a BMC.

Translations: English (Australian) locale is the only translation that MUST be
available.

Other translations are RECOMMENDED.

By default, MUST not write ANYTHING to storage. Petitboot does this using
dm-snapshot, and this functionality MUST NOT be disabled by default.

Petitboot UI MUST run by default

Terminal
--------
If a serial console is used for the petitboot UI, the vt102 terminal
protocol MUST be supported, including support for the utf-8 character
set.


Exit to shell
-------------
MUST always be available.

All userspace utilities are not part of the spec, we explicitly allow variation
and addition/subtraction of userspace utilities as long as this does *not*
alter the behaviour of petitboot itself.

It is RECOMMENDED to keep a useful set of utilities for rescuing and debugging
systems, as this has proved valuable.
